# Project 4

## Title:

End to end framework to enable analyzing data from DNA sequencing
experiments utilizing AI

## Description:

The Saudi Genome Program (SGP) is a mega program with the ambitious
goal of understanding, cataloging and solving genetic diseases that
are prevalent in Saudi Arabia, and one of its main objectives is to
establish advanced infrastructure in the field of genomics and
bioinformatics. Moreover, biology is experiencing a Big Data
revolution brought on by advances in genome sequencing technologies,
leading to new challenges and opportunities in computational
biology. In addition to that, just about a year ago, DeepMind
announced the new Enformer model, a deep learning architecture for
predicting gene expression from DNA sequence, inspired by the
transformer architecture to leverage self-attention processes to
absorb considerably more DNA background. We expect that there will be
a new wave of innovations that will come with this, similar to what
happened to the field of natural language processing (NLP), where
transformers have achieved substantial breakthroughs. Our beliefs that
models like the Enformer will experience similar patterns, and enable
so many solutions. To help accelerate the rate of innovations, our
goal is to enable those who are in the field of bioinformatics by
developing an end to end open source framework for analyzing data from
DNA sequencing experiments utilizing the recent advances in the field
of AI. The solution will utilize the technology of vector search
engines, along with an integrated metadata database, and models with
simplified workflows and pipelines to make it easier for researchers
to apply machine learning on a massive scale to their experiments.

## Theme:

machine learning and AI methods

## Team leader:

 * Name: Esraa Madi
 * Contact: esraa.sabry.mohamed@gmail.com
 
## Submission number:

17
