# Project 11

## Title:

Diabetes Atlas for MENA

## Description:

### Motivation: 
Three of the worldâ€™s top ten diabetes-prevalence countries are in
MENA: the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, and Qatar. Diabetes is a
chronic disease that is among the top 10 causes of disability,
resulting in life-threatening complications such as heart disease,
stroke, lower limb amputations, and blindness, also may lead to a
significant economic burden on individuals and national healthcare
systems (Almubark et al., 2022).

### Methodology:
Diabetes is highly associated with unhealthy lifestyles and other
diseases. In this project, we focus on building a workflow for
regional data integration using text mining and machine learning, and
interpretable data analysis using causal inference, for studying the
lifestyles and phenotypes of diabetics in the MENA region.

(1) Data integration: Diabetic lifestyle-related data can be
potentially extracted by text mining on the MENA region (e.g., from
Twitter), for example, information associated with a decrease in fruit
and vegetable consumption, physical activity, as well as considerable
increases in e-cigarette use, etc.

Text mining and machine learning techniques can be used to generate
latent representations of lifestyle and phenotype data. Furthermore,
the utilization of curated knowledge found in knowledge bases such as
the Human Phenotype Ontology and the Disease Ontology can be used to
enhance the representations of the entities in the data.

(2) Interpretable data analysis After we create a MENA dataset of
lifestyle and phenotypes of diabetics, we can perform downstream tasks
including analyzing the spatial distribution of the diabetes-related
lifestyles and phenotypes among MENA countries and discovering causal
relationships between different diabetes-related phenotypes and
lifestyle patterns."

## Theme:

reproducible workflows for data analysis and interpretation (with
focus on Middle East)

## Team leader:

 * Name: Yan Gong
 * Contact: yan.gong@kaust.edu.sa
 
## Submission number:

37
