# Project 10

## Title:

Reproducing Machine Learning and AI methods using FAIR Workbench

## Description:

Making scientific research artefacts findable, accessible,
interoperable, and reusable—collectively known as the FAIR
principles—has received much attention in recent years. Applying these
ideas to scientific computational workflows is a particular area of
focus as sharing workflows in more detail, including information about
the individual steps, their parameters, and provenance is essential
for reproducibility.  We have recently developed a set of software
tools to automatically generate the metadata about the prospective and
retrospective provenance of scientific computational workflows in
Jupyter notebooks in the context of the FAIR workflows funded by the
Dutch NWO-eScience
(https://github.com/fair-workflows/fairworkflows). The tools were
primarily tested on image processing tasks, but they can also be used
for other scientific computational workflows. Although this approach
enables FAIRification of scientific workflows while building
workflows, additional metadata, such as annotations from existing
ontologies, must be incorporated to make workflows even more FAIR.  In
this project, we propose to reproduce some Python-based machine
learning workflows focusing on biomedical tasks listed in
PapersWithCode (https://paperswithcode.com/ ) using the FAIR Workbench
tool. We will make these workflows more reusable by annotating them
with terms from relevant existing ontologies such as Intelligence Task
Ontology and Knowledge Graph (ITO).  During the hackathon, developers
working on the FAIR workflow library will interact with participants
writing workflows to better understand their experience, and how the
library could be improved. We also plan to work on implementing some
of those improvements during the hackathon, when possible, to have
direct feedback from the users.

## Theme:

reproducible workflows for data analysis and interpretation (with
focus on Middle East)

## Team leader:

 * Name: Remzi Celebi
 * Contact: remzi.celebi@maastrichtuniversity.nl
 
## Submission number:

33
